\section{Overview}\label{sec:overview}

As the world gets more instrumented and connected, we are witnessing a
flood of digital data that is getting generated, at high velocity,
from different hardware (e.g., sensors) or software in the form of
streams of data. Examples of this phenomenon are crucial for several
applications and domains including financial markets, surveillance
systems, manufacturing, smart cities, and scalable monitoring
infrastructure. In these applications and domains, there is a crucial
requirement to collect, process, and analyze big streams of data in
order to extract valuable information, to discover new insights in
real-time, and to detect emerging patterns and outliers. Since 2011
alone, several systems (e.g.,
\textsf{Storm}~\cite{toshniwal_et_al_2014},
\textsf{Apache Apex}\footnote{\url{https://apex.apache.org/}},
\textsf{Spark Streaming}~\cite{zaharia_et_al_2013},
\textsf{Apache Flink}~\cite{carbone_et_al_2015}, and
\textsf{Heron}~\cite{kulkarni_et_al_2015}) have
been introduced to tackle the real-time processing of big streaming
data. However, there are several challenges and open problems that
need to be addressed in order to improve the state-of-the-art in this
domain and to achieve wide adoption of big stream processing systems
by large number of users and enterprises~\cite{sakr2016big}.

This report is based on a five-day workshop on ``\emph{Big Stream
  Processing Systems}'' that took place at Schloss Dagstuhl in Germany
from 29~October to 3~November 2017\footnote{\url{http://www.dagstuhl.de/en/program/calendar/semhp/?semnr=17441}}. The workshop was attended by 29
researchers from from 13 countries. Participants came from different
communities including systems, query languages, benchmarking, stream
mining and semantic stream processing. A major benefit of this
workshop was the opportunity for scholars from different communities
to get exposure to each other and get freely engaged in direct and
interactive discussions. The seminar program consisted of tutorials on
the main topics of the workshop, lightning talks by participants on
their research, and two working groups dedicated to deeply
investigating selected topics. The first group focused on applications
and system of big stream processing while the second group focused on
analyzing the state-of-the-art of stream processing languages. This
report presents highlights from the workshop program.
